Hello friends
In this video we are going to discuss about the
heap sort algorithm so let us see how to perform heap Sort
In the previous video we have learned the build heap
procedure which will arrange all the elements based on the
max heap property
At the end of the build heap procedure The maximum
value element will be present at the root that is
at index zero in the array just as in this example
to sort a set of elements using heap sort algorithm
first
We have to call this built heap procedure which will
create a max heap Now the next step is to
swap the first and last elements of the array
Now the largest element will be present at the end
of the array
So this element is now at its correct sorted position
So one element that is the last element is sort
out now and we only need to sort the remaining
elements so we can reduce the array size by one since
we did a swapping at Index zero
There is a chance that the heap property is violated
So we have to check it again
And if it is not in the correct order swap
and continue the heapify
process here it is violated so heapify
it
So again we will get a heap tree and the
corresponding array
Now again the maximum value will be at the root
of the tree or at index zero in the array so
again swap first and last elements so that maximum value
reaches the last position which is it's correct position
So one more element is sort at now so reduce
the size of array by one and continued this process
until all the elements are sorted
So in each iteration one element is getting sorted
So this is how heap sort algorithm works
In each iteration the maximum element reaches its correct position
and is againing sorted
Now let us see the heap sort algorithm
So this is the procedure
The first step is calling the build heap function to
heapify
the array then we have to do three steps
First swap first and last elements so that the maximum
element reaches its correct position
The second step is to reduce the size by one
since one element is sorted and the third step is
to check heapify
order from index zero and this should be
continued till size becomes zero that is till all the
elements are sorted
So in each iteration one element will be sorted
So at the end all the elements will be in
sorted order
now let us understand how the algorithm works
For example take this array of size six
This build heap function has already arranged all the elements
in the correct order
Let's focus on how heap sort works
So we have this while loop which will sort all
the elements in the first iteration
The condition is okay since size is equal to six
So swap first and last elements that is elements at
index zero and index six and 50
Is that first position The element 80 is it correct
Sorted position now So we do not need to consider
it again
And we only need to sort the remaining elements so
reduced the array size by one so size equal to
five Now since we changed the element at index zero
we have to check
If the heap properties violated and if it is violated
it should be corrected
So called the heapify function at index zero
and see here 60 is greater than 50 so this
will be swapped and the other elements
Okay so that is done
Now one iteration is completed and one element that is
80 is sorted
Now in the next iteration condition is still okay since
size is equal to five which is greater than zero
So swap elements at index zero and index five now
the largest element 60 is at Last position and 40
is at first position since 60 is now at its
actual sorted position we do not need to consider it
anymore
So reduced the array size by one so size is equal
to four now and since we performed a swap operation
at index zero
We have to check if the heap properties violated So
call heapify
function at Index zero and see here 50 is
greater than 40 so this will be swaped and
that is also done And the second iteration is also
completed now and one more element that is 60 is
sorted in the next iteration condition is still satisfied since
size is equal to four so swap elements at index
zero and index
Four now the largest element 50 is that last position
and 20 is that the first position now 50 sorted
so reduced the array size by one
so size is equal to three now and since we changed
the element at index zero we have to check If the
heap properties violated so called the heapify
function at Index zero and see here forties
greater than 20 So these elements will be swapped so
heapify process is completed now the third iteration
is also completed and three elements which are 80 60
and 50 are sorted now in the next iteration
The condition is still satisfied since size is equal to
three which is greater than zero So swap elements at
index zero and Index Three now the largest element 40
we set
The last position and 10 is at the first position
so 40 is that it's right position
So reduced the array size by one
so size is equal to two now and since we changed
the element at index zero we have to call heapify
function at the same position and see here
thirties greater than 10 so this will be swapped
So that is done now
The fourth iteration is also completed and one more element
that is 40 is sorted Now in the next iteration
the condition is still okay since size is equal to
two now So swap elements at index zero and Index
two now the largest element 30 is at the last
position now thirty is at sorted position so reduced the array
size by one so size is equal to one
now since we changed the element at index zero we
have to call heapify function but there are
no problems
This iteration is also completed now and in the next
iteration condition is still okay since size is equal to
one which is greater than 0
So swap elements at index zero and Index one now
the largest element 20 we set
Last position which is stright position and 10 is
at the first position since 20 sorted now
We can reduce the array size by one so size
is equal to zero now
And since we performed a swap operation at index zero
we have to call heapify function here
But there are no issues and this is completed and
the sixth iteration is also completed now and We got
six elements sorted now in the next iteration of the
while
loop
The condition fails since size is equal to zero
And there is only one element left here which must
be the smallest element
And it is at its correct position to So the
sorting is now completed
So this is how heap sort algorithm works.